[Software Architecture](../..) > [Patterns](..) > Messaging

---

These patterns pertain to the flow of control through a system via messages or events.
- An [event-driven](event-driven) architecture inverts the flow of control through a system: rather than one component commanding another component, the first component instead raises an event which the second component is listening for and reacts to appropriately. This allows the system’s components to be decoupled from each other, and gives greater flexibility to alter the system’s behaviour through extension without requiring modification to existing components. When the events are persisted and treated as the primary data source, you have an [event sourced](messaging/event-sourcing) system (see data organisation for more details).
- An event sourced system implicitly implements the [CQRS](cqrs) pattern (command/query responsibility segregation), where the queries (reading data from a persistence store) are separated from the commands (modifying data in a persistence store). It does this by using entities/data structures for modification operations that are distinct from the entities/data structures that are returned by the queries. The CQRS pattern can also be applied to non-event sourced systems: it is also useful in avoiding data inconsistencies due to concurrent updates. It makes a lot of sense when the system producing the data is distinct from the system(s) consuming the data. When the producer and consumer are the same system, the complexity of the design may outweigh its benefits.
- The CQRS pattern contrasts with the [CRUD](crud) design (create, read, update, delete), which uses the same entities or data structures for both queries and updates. CRUD designs are simpler, but care may be needed when updates can occur concurrently.
