[Software Architecture](../..) > [Patterns](..) > Data Organisation

---

These are patterns of organising and structuring data in a persistent store.
- [Key-value](key-value-database) databases are the simplest form of database. They store singly-valued data, where each data value is associated with a unique key that facilitates efficient retrieval.
- A [document](document-database) database is similar to a key-value database except that it facilitates the storing of structured data, typically JSON objects. The database may allow the data to be constrained by a schema or not. It probably facilitates filtering the queried data but cross-referencing is usually difficult.
- [Relational](relational-database) databases organise data into tables, which are discrete collections of rows (or ‘tuples’). Each table has a schema which defines the columns of every row in the table. A relational database management system (RDBMS) allows tables to be cross-referenced (joined) when they are being queried, and there is no need to predefine the queries when the database is being designed, which is what gives them their power and flexibility. Relational databases are queried and manipulated using a declarative language called SQL (structured query language) which allows arbitrarily table joins to be combined with sophisticated set operations to accomplish very powerful data processing. SQL is a defined standard, although each RDBMS implements its own extensions to the language; in this way the database vendors hope to lock you in.
- A [graph](graph-database) database stores data as nodes and relationships. Nodes are entities that store structured data as key-value pairs and can be tagged to indicate their roles or types. Relationships are directed connections between nodes, meaning the start and end nodes are not interchangeable. Relationships also have a type, so that a node can have many different kinds of relationships with other nodes. The direction of a relationship is semantic: they can be traversed in either direction when querying. In other words, you can query which department a person works in and you can query which people work in a given department. Unlike relational databases where the joins are cross-referenced on the fly when querying, graph databases persist the relationships along with the nodes.
- An [event sourced](../messaging/event-sourcing) database stores data in the form of a permanent and immutable history of deltas (events) which in principle allow the state of the database at any point in its history to be reconstructed on demand. This contrasts with the standard CRUD model where a single version of each entity is held and updated in place, so no kind of history is maintained.
